# ArtStudio
My Art Studio
I.	Description:
a.	The user will use the mouse to select colors and draw/paint a drawing on the screen, which they can save to their computer.
II.	Purpose: 
a.	People will use this application as a fun way to create digital paintings/drawings, similar to Microsoft Paint.
III.	MVC:
a.	My Model consists of a User class and Theme class. This collection of classes is the foundation of my painting application and where all the data necessary is stored. My user class consists of all the properties of a user of my application, including username and password, and I read the users from and store new users in a JSON file I have included in my project directory. My Theme class stores all the properties of a theme of the website, which the user can customize. It includes a background image and hex color strings of different components of the website such as buttons, text, etc. I have my loaded themes in another JSON file and I read from it to allow the user different options for their theme. 
b.	My View  contains all of the classes in the application package of my project, all of the different scenes that the user will interact with. Here is a simple View class design with a brief overview of the notable components each class has. These are described in more detail in the Program Flow section. Each of these scenes contains a SceneController object that they interact with and pass data through. Furthermore, the Paint Scene contains a ToolController object that it sends data to in order to manipulate how the user draws on the screen.
	My Controllers package contains all the controllers that act as the mediators between the scenes and the models. My SceneController class acts as the main controller, as it switches between scenes and contains a ThemeController and a UserController class, so it passes around data from the scenes to those controllers, acting as a controller for the controllers. My ThemeController class handles reading from the JSON of themes and storing the themes, as well as switching the current theme. My UserController class deals with reading in and writing to the User JSON file, storing all users and switching the current user, as well as validation for log in and signup, creation of new users, and editing user details. Lastly, my ToolController class, an instance of which can be found in the Paint Scene, stores all the information about the current way the user is choosing to draw, including size of tool, current color, a string to classify the tool, and the draw method that interacts with the GraphicsContext of the Canvas I am using. The Paint Scene therefore interacts with this controller and calls different methods in the controller based on different mouse events, as the user draws using their mouse. The ToolController actually controls how the user draws on the canvas based on the current information. The Canvas and GraphicsContext are both built in JavaFX classes that carry properties that I need to build my paint application.
IV.	Program Flow:
a.	Home Page: The user starts at this page, and it contains buttons that give the user the option to sign up or log in. Furthermore, the user has options to toggle language change from English to Spanish or vice versa.
b.	Log In: This page prompts the user to enter their username and password into two text fields, and it contains a button that allows them to log in with the current credentials as well as a button that takes them back to the previous menu. The Log in button can be toggled with the Enter key, as well as by click, and the user can maneuver the text fields with the Tab button. When the user toggles the log in button, if the log in is invalid, an alert pops up displaying a messaged customized for the situation (if fields are left blank, the username or password are incorrect, etc.) to give the user more specific instruction. If the Log in is successful, the user is taken to the main paint scene. All components are displayed in the language currently selected on the home page.
c.	Sign Up: This page prompts the user to enter a username and a password, which they must repeat, into three text fields, and it contains a button that allows them to sign up with the current credentials as well as a button that takes them back to the previous menu. The sign-up button can be toggled with the Enter key, as well as by click, and the user can maneuver the text fields with the Tab button. When the user toggles the sign-up button, if the sign up is invalid, an alert pops up displaying a messaged customized for the situation (if fields are left blank, the username is taken, passwords do not match, etc.) to give the user more specific instruction. If the sign up is successful, the user is registered in the database and is taken to the main paint scene. All components are displayed in the language currently selected on the home page.
d.	Paint Scene: This is the main scene of the program, and it contains a blank canvas and panels on the top, left, and right. The top panel contains the title: “Username’s Art Studio”. The left panel contains a color picker indicating the current color of the user’s tool, a Combo Box containing the options for the stamps the user can pick if they have selected the stamp tool (this currently includes circle, oval, rectangle, and line) a slider with a corresponding label that indicates its value, which indicates the current tool size, and a set of tool buttons. The tool buttons include paintbrush, marker, eraser, stamp, and options to save and clear. Whichever button the user selects is the current tool at the time. The paintbrush causes strokes to be more spotty and less consistent (best for drawing curves, shading, etc.), the marker causes strokes to be consistent but straight (best for drawing outlines, not as good for drawing smaller, curved shapes), the eraser allows the user to erase any strokes they have made (similar to the paintbrush in terms of spottiness but square shaped), and the stamp button allows the user to drag the mouse to create the designated shape (the program records the start and end x and y values on mouse press and mouse release to create the designated shape). The clear button prompts an alert that asks the user to confirm their choice to clear the canvas, an action that cannot be undone, and then clears all strokes on the canvas. The save button allows the user to save their work and uses File Chooser to allow the user to save a .PNG file of the canvas on their computer. There are keyboard shortcuts to toggle all of the tool buttons, that change for people who are using the app in Spanish, as the keys correspond to the first letter of the word of each tool. Furthermore, the tool size slider can be manipulated using the arrow keys, and this can be done while the user is drawing, which allows for some creative designs, as the size of the tool can change as it is being used. The right panel contains options for logging out, changing settings, and viewing instructions. The settings and instructions buttons take the user to those pages. The log out button prompts an alert that allows the user to save their work before logging out, cancel log out, or continue log out. If they choose to save their work, a File Chooser object will pop up and allow them to save the work and then automatically log them out. The log out button can be toggled by the Q button on the keyboard. All components are displayed in the current chosen language and current chosen theme.
e.	Settings: This page allows users to change their user settings, change the language, and change the current theme of the application. There are text fields for changing the username and password and repeating the changed password, and based on what the user fills out and when they press the save button (which can be toggled by the Return key, and the text fields can be toggled by Tab), the UserController detects what they are attempting to change and sends back a custom message saying what worked or what did not work, which is displayed in an alert. Furthermore, there is a Combo Box of options for the themes, and the user can pick whichever theme they like, and all components of the website will immediately change to fit the theme. Lastly, the user can change the language settings by clicking the corresponding buttons, and the language of the website will change immediately. There is also an option for the user to go back to the paint page. 
f.	Instructions: This page contains text that explains the instructions/functionality of the game as well as the different keyboard shortcuts of each component, and this text displays in the currently selected language. Note that as mentioned previously, keyboard shortcuts vary for some components based on the currently selected language, as they correspond to the first letter of the words for each tool. It is assumed that the user will pick the language that they understand and stick with that language, so there should be little confusion. Furthermore, there is a button that leads the user back to the paint page. 
V.	Future plans/What didn’t work:
a.	I stored the complete code for this app on my GitHub account, so that I can work on it and enhance it more in the future. I hope to enhance the look of the website and make it look more professional through research and experimentation based on the knowledge of design principles that I have now. I plan to add more themes to the database and tools to the paint scene page, as well as an option for the user to undo their work, which turned out to be past the scope of what I was able to do, because this was my first time using GraphicsContext and Canvas. One thing I really wanted to implement but it was too difficult under the time constraints was allowing users to save their work on their account and allow them to view past projects. I wasn’t really sure how to do this however, because I think it would involve an external file of .PNG images, and the database would have to read from there. However, I do want to implement this in the future. In general, I think my main goal is to add more features to the User class in general and give users something that characterizes their account and makes it worth it for them to create an account, and I think a good place to start would be a list of past projects. I could also add something like common/favorite tool settings, or liked projects, and give them the option to like other users’ projects, expanding the app into some sort of a social media app.
VI.	Accessibility/localization: 
a.	I allowed users to change the language settings of the website on the Home Page and in their settings page when they log in/sign up. I also added Accessibility Text to all components that is customized to the selected language, and I added keyboard shortcuts for many components.
VII.	8 Golden Rules of Interface Design:
a.	Consistency: I was consistent with my colors in my entire app, and I required the same type of command sequences in my Log in, Sign Up, and Settings pages, and all of them displayed similar error messages. I tried to group similar components and behaviors together.
b.	User Shortcuts: I implemented a lot of keyboard shortcuts for the users to make it easier for them to maneuver the application.
c.	Informative Feedback: When logging in, signing up, or changing settings, I give the user informative error messages and make sure that they are clear on the status of their actions.
d.	Dialog to Yield Closure: I don’t think this was as applicable in my application, but I divided my signing up and logging in into separate pages from the painting scene, which acts as a different group of actions or steps. Furthermore, I make sure users know the status of their actions; for example, when they are changing settings, I display a success message showing them what they have changed.
e.	Simple Error Handling: When logging in, signing up, or changing settings, I display messages that are informative about the errors that the user has made and tell them what to change.
f.	Easy Reversal of Actions: I will implement this when I implement my undo button for the Paint Scene later. Currently, I do this when the user tries to clear their work or log out, as I prompt them to confirm their actions and allow them a way out in case it was a mistake.
g.	Internal Locus of Control: The Paint Scene seems to implement this by nature, as the user controls all aspects of what they are drawing on the screen. Furthermore, they control their settings, the language, and how the website looks. In terms of maneuvering the application, I made sure that there were no unexpected or ambiguous components and that all aspects of the application are easy to use and act as expected.
h.	Short Term Memory Load: I will most likely implement this later, as there is not a lot for the user to “remember” right now. Most likely, when I implement the “undo” command, I will allow the user to revert back up to a certain number of versions. Or, when the user views their past projects, I’ll only display a certain number at a time.
VIII.	Gestalt Rules: 
a.	I implement proximity on the Paint Scene page, where I group similar buttons and tools together on the right and left panels, so the user knows that they are related in terms of functionality. I further create relationships between buttons by making them all look similar according to the theme, so that when one tool is selected, the user can tell that that tool is selected while all the other tools in that group are not selected. I also implement continuity in this area, as the buttons are all grouped together in a way that flows, allowing the user to move their eyes down the screen so that they can look at all the tools. Furthermore, I put all the tools and buttons on the sides of the canvas so that they frame it and the user is drawn towards the middle of the screen, where the canvas is. I implement figure-ground by distinguishing all components from the background, by putting them on some kind of layer of their own so that it is not confusing for the reader to focus on. 
IX.	Sources:
a.	These were some sources that, along with Microsoft Paint, helped inspire me to build this app and helped me figure out some important features that I had in mind. Furthermore, they helped me become more familiar with Canvas and GraphicsContext:
i.	https://gist.github.com/abdelaziz321/e9932bd15e4b263c3dae08644c61600c
ii.	https://stackoverflow.com/questions/33466871/javafx-paint-program-with-canvas
iii.	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0u5aotARyU8
iv.	http://java-buddy.blogspot.com/2013/04/free-draw-on-javafx-canvas.html
b.	This source helped teach me how to work with File Chooser to save my projects as images:
i.	 http://java-buddy.blogspot.com/2013/04/save-canvas-to-png-file.html
c.	This source taught me how to work with Alerts:
i.	http://code.makery.ch/blog/javafx-dialogs-official/
d.	I also used Oracle, Stack Overflow, and Tutorials Point for information about the different classes I was working with as well as some small code snippets just for getting the design looking the way I wanted it to. 

